Title     : defrage.
Author    : michael
Created   : 2013-06-09T15:15:22
Tags      : music
Comments  : Off
Trackback : Off
TagURI    : tag:fnanp.in-ulm.de,2013-06-09:2013/06/09/defrage

This is the story of how I met a member of the Band
[Defrage](https://de-de.facebook.com/defragemusic) (warning: link goes to
Facebook).

I was at a petrol station near [Innsbruck,
Austria](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Innsbruck), filling up the tank of
my car, when a young man carrying a plastic bag approached me and asked me
whether I spoke English. Assuming he wanted to ask for directions, I said
yes. He then wanted to know whether I liked music (a quite generic
question, but whatever). A bit unsure where that conversation was heading,
I answered yes again.

He then proceeded to tell me that he was in a band from
[Estonia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Estonia) and wanted to know what
*kind* of music I liked. Since I wanted to give the shortest possible
answer I said "Metal". At which point he pulled a cardboard cd-sleeve out
of his plastic bag, turned it around and pointed at a track-title marked
there which said "We Are Metal" and explained that, in fact, his band
*was* a Metal band. He then told me that his band was right now on tour
through Europe and was going to play at [Nova
Rock](http://www.novarock.at) in a short while, but since they were a
young band without big resources, they were trying to finance their
touring by selling CDs to people and hey, would I maybe be interested in
purchasing a CD from him? Only EUR 15!

Now, on the one hand, stories that start with "I met this guy at a petrol
station/highway rest area, and he sold me X" are usually tales of how
somebody was conned into buying something utterly worthless or maybe even
an empty package. On the other hand, I liked his main argument ("if we
ever become famous, you'll be able to sell it on ebay for a million!"). So
I thought what the hell, gave him EUR 15 and received a shrink-wrapped
cardboard CD sleeve. He thanked me and then turned his attention onto
another prospective customer (and I saw that a colleague of his was busy
trying the same approach on a young lady at the next pump).

Getting into my car, I remarked to my wife that I was curious to find out
whether there actually *was* a CD in the sleeve at all.

And there was.

And bloody hell does it sound great!

I would describe the sound as sortof [Fear
Factory](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fear_Factory) during the
[Obsolete](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fear_Factory#Obsolete_.281998.E2.80.932000.29)
era (which, to me, equals "brilliant!"). Apparently, the CDs are not
available for sale through normal channels but the band seems to be quite
busy using their unique sales approach in parking lots/fastfood
restaurants/pedestrian areas in Austria/Bavaria/Switzerland. So if you
happen to meet them, definitely buy that CD!

5 out of 5 stars!
