Title     : arp.
Author    : michael
Created   : 2013-06-10T11:17:19
Tags      : computers, networking, android
Comments  : Off
Trackback : On
TagURI    : tag:fnanp.in-ulm.de,2013-06-10:2013/06/10/arp

So I've stumbled across this weird networking issue while using my Android
phone (a rooted Droid 4). What I was seeing was this:

I had gone to our [club](http://www.in-ulm.de) hangout and had used the
wifi there. After coming back home again, and using my wifi at home, my
phone wouldn't connect to my server, neither via SSH nor via IMAPS nor any
other protocol. Fearing something had caused my server to go offline, I
tried to reach it in other ways (i.e. by connecting through other hosts).

I then discovered something weird.

* my server _was_ online
* I could connect to it via some other remote host that took a different
 path into the server network
* oh wait, I could connect to it via a different host that was in the same
 network as my server? (Meaning the network as such was reachable)
* oh wait, other computers _inside my wifi_ can connect to the server? Uh
 .. what?
* oh wait, when I disconnect from my wifi and use the 3G connection
 instead, I _can_ connect to the server

So, next, I looked at the shell on my phone again and tried to see if
maybe the routing was broken, but 

    $ ip route show

gave a completely normal output (i.e. there was only the default route to
my wifi router plus the local netmask). Next, I tried to see whether there
was a pattern to to the IP addresses I could reach and the ones I
couldn't. There was. It was _only_ the IP address of my server that was
unreachable. I tried connecting to the IP addresses of some VMs that run
_on that server_ (i.e. behind the same bridging interface) and they were
reachable.

Just for laughs, I used another IP address from the same server network
that was unused at that time and added that one to the interface, and
my server was instantly reachable via that address. So it really was that
one, specific, IP address that was unreachable.

At which point a colleague of mine (I had thrown my story out to some
people I know to aid in brainstorming) said "Have you looked at the arp
cache?"

I hadn't.

So I did.

    $ arp
    fnanp.in-ulm.n-addr.arpa (217.10.9.38) at <incomplete> on wlan0

So. A full two days earlier, my phone had been connected to a wifi in
which said server can be reached without going through a router and
therefore had added the servers address to its arp cache. If I read the
arp(7) manpage correctly, the lifetime of an entry in the arp cache should
be around the 30 seconds mark, but at this point it was already 48 hours
that it had been there. Another way to see that the phone thought the
server should be in the same network:

    $ ip neigh show
    217.10.9.38 dev wlan0 FAILED

also

    $ ip route show cache | grep 217.10.9.38

showed it as a local address that was offline. At this point I was
pondering whether I should flush the cache and just be done with it or
whether I wanted to find out more about this. But then my parents came
over to visit and we went out to have dinner. When we came back and my
phone reconnected to my wifi, the issue was gone.

Well, I'll be back in the wifi that caused the whole problem tomorrow
evening. I'm curious whether it'll happen again.
